it's probably a safe bet that the
all-powerful Chinese President Xi
Jingping
is not a regular viewer of 60 minutes
but he'll certainly want to say this
story and that's because from his point
of view it's all about the unthinkable a
Chinese spy one of his own people is
betraying him breaking ranks and
defecting to the west Australia to be
more specific tonight
China's dirty secrets will be revealed
by a very brave man who's now placed a
very big target on himself and being no
doubt what one licheng is doing is so
dangerous speaking publicly is probably
the only way to save his life
hi Nick are you around we have something
you might be interested in an informant
came to see us in relation to wanting to
expose how the Chinese spy network works
around the world as an investigative
reporter there are very few times I've
received a message this important it's
late October and one of my sources tells
me a spy for the Chinese Communist Party
wants to blow his cover today this guy
was actually being followed
he realized that if he doesn't expose
this soon his life might be in danger I
arranged to meet him in an airport hotel
in Sydney
and what one William lachung reveals is
stunning and unprecedented are you
scared
in speaking out what Amazings of face to
tell the truth inside of me I am
extremely frightened you know kanji
this is a confession like no other
[Applause]
never before has a Chinese spy gone
public in this way
in from the cold our insider admits
personal involvement in a series of
Chinese espionage missions
[Music]
in Hong Kong violence and kidnappings
aimed at disrupting the democracy
movement and in Taiwan a master plan to
bring down the president what risk is he
taking in speaking out and going public
death death not just for him but for his
own family
the fate of Wong lachung and his young
family now rests with the Australian
government he's told them Chinese spies
are operating here with impunity and
tonight we corroborate his claims by
exposing the operation to place an agent
in our Parliament it was like something
out of a spinal this isn't just cash in
a bag you know given for favors this is
a state-sponsored attempt to infiltrate
our Parliament and Australians should be
very very concerned about this
[Music]
one William lachung has painted for as
long as he can remember
he loves the feeling of freedom and
self-expression it brings him and yet
these are the very privileges he's
devoted his adult life to destroy by
working as a spy were you working as a
Chinese intelligence officer sudah yes
at 27 Wong's fresh face appearance
belies a disturbing reality for years he
says he's performed undercover espionage
operations on behalf of the Chinese
government fortune gala my eagle and
though though though none of my family
members knew until I came to Australia
and applied for a protection Wang says
his life as a spy began when he was
enlisted to work for a so called
investment company based in Hong Kong
but it was actually a front for Chinese
government spy agencies and he alleges
his boss young-shin
was a high ranking military official
seen our awards and with he was trying
to recruit me as a corps member it took
you into his trust so that yes to be
honest there's a Chinese national this
was attractive singles yeah as in it's
attractive to be a spy at that time the
word spy didn't cross our mind we just
thought that those things were the tasks
we need to do for the country
one of Wong's first missions in Hong
Kong was to sabotage the city's
independence movement for months now the
streets here have resembled a battle
zone with rolling protests and
escalating violence
but the fight for control of Hong Kong
has really been going on for much longer
for the first time one reveals Beijing
secret strategies this is something I
really want to let the public know I
know very well the way they operate to
achieve his mission
Wang was ordered to infiltrate
universities to convert students away
from democracy movements and into the
arms of the Chinese Communist Party hi
common channel schism week 3 we send
some mainland students to join these
students Association and they pretended
to support Hong Kong independence they
found out information about those
pro-independence activists then we
attack them verbally and made public all
their personal data as well as the data
of their parents and family members in
such a way it effectively silenced their
did you instruct people to gather
intelligence or information about
dissidents students democracy activists
Scioscia come in the bleeding they
didn't necessarily know that they were
spying the students in Australia and the
other countries were not even aware that
these so-called information collecting
was espionage
it's not something he's proud of but one
says many of the students he influenced
are now involved in the violent clashes
with pro-democracy students as we've
seen again this week yes I influenced
them with patriotism guiding them to
love the country love the party and our
leaders and fight back strongly against
those independence and democracy
activists in Hong Kong
could well never come back here to Hong
Kong no he can't
he just can't do it if he's just if he's
you know for him to survive stay alive
to stay alive yesterday he can't come
back here
Philip Gregory has spent years trying to
expose Chinese spies he says Wong's
revelations about Beijing 'z activities
in Hong Kong will ignite tensions
how rare is it that he's doing what he's
doing this is once-in-a-lifetime kind of
situation the fact that he's risk so
much and that he's so articulate about
what he's doing the fact that he can
name names you know this is incredible
you can have a rumor but if you name
names it's a different story it's not
just universities where Wang's spy
operation worked it's influenced many
Western media outlets and politicians
describe such activities as peaceful
protests his extraordinary claim is that
his boss infiltrated local media from
inside major Hong Kong television
networks does that have a ring of
authenticity to it absolutely I've been
controlling the messages what it's all
about you know the idea is to get the
message right to the people that need to
know it and in China
that's the party's message
as a specialist in counter espionage
Philip Gregory has watched our interview
with Wong and scrutinized his claims
what are your impressions a young man
full of incredible torment a brave man
someone whose really believes what he's
saying
you call him brave how brave incredibly
brave to a point that the only thing
that I think sustains this man is his
strong belief in what he's doing and in
particular on freedom for himself and
face children what would happen to you
if he went back to China
you can't India the babe hundreds
imagine the consequence of a spy
betraying the organization I know very
well that the Chinese Communist Party
can never be trusted once I go back I
will be dead
coming up that's not your name is
disguise no distortion and deceit
we established a cyber army I gave the
orders kidnapping and other crimes
you're making some big statements but is
he telling the truth
every detail can stand up to scrutiny
that's next on 61 William lachung is the
first Chinese spy to ever publicly blow
his cover in Australia he's exposing
secrets about China's interference
operations around the world but in
exchange he urgently wants our
protection well you're making some big
statements why should Australia or
Australians believe you me if I don't
tell the truth the Australian Government
will not protect me there is no benefit
for me every detail and every incident I
have spoken about can stand up to
scrutiny
[Music]
we've come here to Hong Kong to verify
parts of our insider story it's a place
that for him he's far too dangerous to
ever come back to
[Music]
one says one of his most alarming
assignments for Beijing was an operation
that terrified the people of Hong Kong
and caused international uproar for
others connected to the bookstore have
reportedly disappeared in just the last
two months it was late 2015
when one by one five owners of the
Causeway Bay bookshop disappeared only
to reappear in detention on China's
mainland it's widely believed the
abductions were ordered because the
store was selling anti Communist Party
books but Beijing's always denied it and
to be fair there's never been any proof
until now is it right that you helped
organize the Causeway Bay bookshop
kidnapping you may say so as I was one
of the insiders who ordered the task
this is the first time an agent inside
the kidnapping operation has broken
ranks most of the victims like this man
Lee Bo were terrified of reprisals and
so refused to admit they were kidnapped
no doubt zone how about they huh
unalloyed a but one tells a very
different story we were directly
involved in coordinating the kidnapping
of Lebo Wang says he personally
delivered the orders from his boss to
the kidnapping team Oh Mormons my boss's
organization is in direct contact with
the Chinese sighs and what were the
orders that you gave to the person you
contacted job or arrest Lee Bo as soon
as possible now he sent six agents who
took Lee Bo from the storeroom of
Causeway Bay books directly to mainland
China
Beansie dialogue we may hide another
loss yeah
it's just here in the bookshop was a
major incident because people were just
expressing their views Australian
intelligence expert Philip Gregory knows
the bookshop case well and he's traveled
with us to Hong Kong to help test Wong
stores you know the sciences of closed
the Chinese state has always denied the
kidnappings why is what our insider has
to say about it's so important because
he gives us the detail you know from an
from an intelligence point of view what
he's doing here is really pinpointing
the series of actions that led up to it
and giving us very clear insight as to
why it happened and how it happened how
all the Chinese state view him talking
about the Causeway Bay bookshop
kidnappers they'll see it as a essential
betrayal he's put himself against the
biggest state in the world the details
wrong is risking his life to reveal our
extraordinary
but from our investigation they hold up
in Hong Kong we checked names addresses
company details and we've spoken to
confidential sources on the 22nd floor
of this tower is the headquarters of
Wang's spy operation business records
link it to the Chinese military's
weapons arm the Lincoln sets yet another
of Wang's stunning revelations that his
organization was allegedly involved in
stealing US military intelligence bureau
shun me to steal US intelligence is
absolutely my boss's most important work
why he mentioned on many occasions that
the US had been closely monitoring him
because much of the US intelligence he
had stolen was obtained in other
countries those she thought was an
outside Philip Gregory says ones
decision to release insider secrets like
this one will incensed the Chinese
Communist Party this is a threat that
needs to be taken care of from their
point of view so I would have thought
that we need to be extra vigilant with
this young man he's by speaking out
given himself a death sentence
effectively long term he he has to face
the the prospect that his life will be
always under threat because they will
not forget
coming up follow his really scam made in
China we could instantly take down their
Facebook the
plan to overthrow a fallen leader
haywire is in the front line or
democratic countries should pay
attention and the plot to infiltrate
Australia he was cultivated by Chinese
government to run as a little party
candidate that's next 60 minutes most
spies will face a moment however
fleeting when their loyalty falters but
really does it lead to an operative
abandoning his country and spilling its
secrets
[Music]
that's what makes one William leach
Young's decision so unusual that's you
in the photo yeah is that your date of
birth no that's not your name is it no
he says his moment of truth came six
months ago with the arrival of a fake
passport it triggered a deep fear that
he was about to lose his true identity
forever when did you decide to become a
defector I was given the task to go to
Taiwan this time I was to change my name
my whole identity to go to Taiwan and be
a spider this is the main reason I came
to Australia to seek asylum the mission
Wang's bosses planned for him in Taiwan
would have been his most critical yet US
Navy Chiefs sailed their warships
through the strategic and highly
sensitive Taiwan Strait today Taiwan is
the major fault line between the world's
two most powerful countries the US and
China some experts say tensions over
Taiwan could even spark war but as one
reveals a secret battle is already being
waged Taiwan would be among all issues
what the Chinese Communist Party is most
concerned about is the unification of
Taiwan then Xi Jinping's position would
be unshakable uo3
our insider says Beijing wants to topple
Taiwan's current u.s. friendly president
and it's master plan to do it will alarm
the world is it right what you're saying
your job was to meddle in Taiwan's
upcoming presidential election secretly
for the Chinese government yes that's
why I needed to change my name and not
use my true identity was your ultimate
aim to make sure the current president
of Taiwan was not elected yes woman hi
the ones on
taijuan was the most important work of
house the infiltration into media the
temples and grassroots organizations
[Music]
temples like this one were targeted by
Wong's operation because they're such
important political and social hubs here
in Taiwan
his ultimate aim was to undermine the
Taiwanese president because she's
considered hostile by Beijing the world
woke up to the reality of election
meddling when Russia was exposed for
interfering in the 2016 US election they
used sophisticated cyber techniques to
hack into computers and networks used by
the Clinton campaign it's eerily similar
to what's now playing out in Taiwan
deputy foreign minister suchan Xu is
convinced his country's political system
is under cyberattack from Beijing but
his government has never been able to
prove it
are you concerned severely yes gravely
we are gravely concerned about this why
should the international community care
about what is going on in Taiwan Taiwan
is in the front line so it's not only
issue between China becomes China and
Taiwan it's an issue between two
political camps in the world so what's
happening in Taiwan today it's a good
example for what will happen in other
parts of the world and I think all
democratic countries should pay
attention to what what's going on into
democracy here is hard one and fiercely
protected at this rally political
factions fight it out in a passionate if
at times
overzealous display of freedom of speech
and political expression Taiwan's
democracy looks healthy but one claims
it's under attack and he should know one
of his key missions was to back the
presidential candidate appearing here
tonight by secretly meddling in the
election
this is presidential candidate hon core
you he's preferred by Beijing and boasts
an army of backers but during last
year's local elections he had a secret
army - one knows this because he was
their boss woman's honey the one you
beat all wonky sri rama soon we
established a cyber army if we wanted to
attack someone we could instantly take
down their facebook Taiwan yeah or the
GB I was responsible for organizing the
cyber army attacks and a large number of
people involved were University students
I was on so - and you were giving orders
which we added I gave the order we
changed their IP addresses to other
countries so they would not be
identified
once our messages were out online public
opinion would follow
one reveals his organization also has
control over operatives working at
Taiwan's leading media outlets who were
directed to shift public debate in
Beijing favor right now we are facing
multiple threats do you think some
within the Chinese Communist Party fear
Taiwan's system of democracy definitely
definitely
I mean chai China has an authoritarian
regime Xi Jinping is his intent to
disrupt our democracy to undermine our
government's credibility and to decrease
our citizens trusting our government
would it surprise you to learn that the
Chinese government is sending
intelligence operatives into Taiwan with
the order to interfere in the election
if we understand how Chinese come his
party Iran's their government we won't
be surprised by that Wang says he's
supposed to be in Taiwan right now
carrying out his orders to sabotage the
upcoming presidential election
instead since May he's been hiding out
in Australia where his wife is studying
and living with their two-year-old son
it's taken five months for one to gather
the courage to contact the Australian
government and ask for protection why
did it take me so long to stand up it
was because during this period of time
they had been continuously trying to
persuade me to come back go find me that
Libya including following me in
Australia so you say you were followed
what happened Kawa they wanted to see
whom and what kind of people I made
contact with to track my movements and
find out my address I have moved house
three times within such a short time and
I may move again in the future it's the
feeling of being followed is really
scary
was Nick's our working for Asia mystery
in Melbourne guy who was a bit of a
high-roller living beyond his means the
Chinese plot it was surreal bucks on the
out of the spine up to penetrate our
government the first thing I've been
doing is recruiting
that's next sixty minutes
[Music]
it's early March and the cleaner at a
motel in suburban Melbourne has
discovered a body on the floor of a room
the dead man is Nick Jiao a Melbourne
car dealer and a young father of one his
death is sudden and mysterious and
whispers begin to spread not only among
his friends and family but through
Australia's intelligence world - when
did you first hear about Nick sale
I heard about Nick zero several months
ago what did you hear I heard that he
was a 32 year old Norman resident
cultivated by the Chinese government to
run as a Liberal Party candidate in the
Commonwealth Parliament and Nick Co is
now dead
federal MP Andrew hasty chairs the
parliamentary Joint Committee on
Intelligence and Security he's been
briefed on the suspicious circumstances
surrounding the death of Nick Jo
including allegations he was targeted by
a Chinese spy ring it was surreal it was
like something out of a spy novel
happening in Melbourne with impunity and
very very concerning
Nick Jo projected an image of success
flush with cash fast cars and big plans
to expand his auto business in 2015 he
joined at the Liberal Party in the East
Melbourne seat of Chisholm he was a
paid-up member which means he was likely
active in his branch and division the
seat is currently held by Australia's
first Chinese born female MP Gladys Liu
in September she faced accusations she
was a Manchurian Candidate planted by
the Chinese Communist Party the Prime
Minister defended her the story
generated plenty of smoke but very
little fire but something far more
sinister had been happening in her
electorate we can reveal that prior to
his death Liberal Party member Nick Joe
claims to have been approached in
Melbourne by a suspected Chinese spy
ring and offered an extraordinary
assignment the young father was promised
a seven-figure sum in exchange for him
running as a political candidate in
federal parliament Nick himself I think
was a perfect target for cultivation a
guy who was a bit of a high roller in
Melbourne living beyond his means
someone who was vulnerable to a foreign
state intelligence service Cole debating
this case with
is strong and clinical allegations and
evidence of an actual plot to infiltrate
our Parliament seems to go much further
than anything we've heard to date how
important how different how serious is
it this isn't just cash in a bag you
know given for favors this is a
state-sponsored attempt to infiltrate
our Parliament using an Australian
citizen and basically run them as an
agent of foreign influence in our
democratic system so this is really
significant and Australians should be
very very concerned about this sources
say the suspected Chinese spy ring that
targeted Nick Jiao is under
investigation by a zio we can expose the
identity of the man who according to
Nick Jiao told him to infiltrate our
Parliament
his name is Brian Chen and our
investigation shows he appears to be a
busy Chinese businessman who bounces
between Melbourne and Asia but when he
last passed through Melbourne Airport he
was interrogated by Australian
authorities and accused of being a spy
in Hong Kong we tracked down his office
corporate records confirm he's in
business with the Chinese military's
main weapons company Norinco what does
his profile tell us about his likely
connection to Chinese military
intelligence it just looks like a trail
across the sky um from from my point of
view Australian intelligence expert
Philip Gregory says there are several
red flags about Brian Chen's behavior
which would have attracted a SEOs
attention
as an analyst the first thing I'll be
doing is targeting this guy for a
disruption operation or looking to
recruit him it seems Nick Jiao was
concerned about Brian Chen too he never
followed through on Chen's alleged
request to infiltrate our Parliament
instead his associates have told us he
turned to Australia's National Security
Agency Ozio for help was Nick's our
working for Asia not gonna go into the
details of what I know that would be
improper
we contacted Brian chin and asked him if
he knew Nick Jiao he denied it he also
insists he's just a businessman who's
been unfairly questioned by Australian
authorities but for a businessman
Brian Chen's denials are curious for
instance he's been seen wearing a
Chinese military uniform but he says he
simply likes to show off by dressing up
in a costume
we asked him why he sometimes poses as a
journalist at international conferences
he says it's because he simply likes to
network
no one knows why Nick Joe was found dead
in the Melbourne motel room eight months
ago there is no suggestion Brian Chen is
involved but whether it was natural
causes suicide or something more
sinister his death means he'll never
repeat his allegations about the offer
to infiltrate our Parliament everyone
should be concerned about the way that
Nick is our diet and I think we need a
full investigation where we turn over
every stone we explore every nook and
cranny we cast as much light into the
shadows and make sure that we have a
full and comprehensive understanding of
how he died and why he died you're known
is being especially hostile to the
Chinese Communist Party it's just not
you just engaging in a bit of China
bashing not at all my bottom line is
Australian sovereignty protecting our
values our institutions and our people
and that's why I'm speaking up it's why
our Chinese intelligence Insider is
talking to one William a Cheung claims
he's aware of multiple Chinese spies
operating in Australia right now during
a meeting with our research team he
reveals his boss in Hong Kong has
current dealings with Australia's most
infamously accused Chinese government
agent Guangzhou mo where is Frank mo
right now in Hong Kong in my boss's
office Fung mo is in mr. Chung's office
right down that's why I'm washing day
sins act he is in his office right now
the billionaire who's been thrown out of
Australia for his links with the Chinese
Communist Party is also being
investigated for making dubious
political donations but one dismisses
him as small fry compared to the Chinese
spies Australia should be targeting
warrants young Morgan hyung hyung Mao is
definitely a small potato compared with
others I know faith
[Music]
are you willing to work with the
Australian government to tell the
government about how Chinese
intelligence operates she lost you in
the dance well what since I have chosen
to stand up here I am absolutely willing
to cooperate coming up
please come out into the light hasn't it
the dangerous consequences are you
prepared ever to see your mother your
father your back in China ever again oh
but train Beijing I think it takes huge
reserves of courage is this spy a hero
because it's got something that affects
future generations a fool in word you
could be got at here I am very worried
about my safety in Australia at next 60
minutes
at 27 1 William lachung is experiencing
a taste of what freedom feels like it's
a privilege he desperately wants to hold
on to not for his own sake but for the
future of his wife and two-year-old son
what is your hope for your wife for your
son for yourself
yes I would I love my wife and my family
I hope that my child's future life will
not be manipulated in any way and that
he can live an independent free healthy
and positive life but Wong and his
family are far from free even as they
hire here in Sydney in the wake since he
came forward to us he says he's also met
with a CEO he's seeking Australia's
protection but there are no guarantees
he'll get it federal MP Andrew hasty
says he deserves our help I think it
takes huge reserves of courage to step
out into the public square as a former
Chinese spy and reveal to the Australian
public what you've been up to some
Australians may be instinctively
hesitant to say well he worked for the
dark side why should we support this man
well he's come out into the light hasn't
he and he's a friend of democracy and I
think he deserves our protection and our
support should the Australian Government
give him a protection visa I'm off the
view that anyone who's willing to assist
us in defending our sovereignty deserves
our protection
Wong is living in constant fear of being
watched or attacked even inside
Australia
he says his boss back in Hong Kong knows
his missing in action and has already
taken steps to persuade him to return
young-shin denies all of Wang's
allegations and says they're untrue
overnight police in China released a
statement accusing Wang of being a
convicted fraud and wanted fugitive
aboard say since I came to Australia in
May they have worked on me
they're threatening was in a soft way
using my family members well-being and
safety to negotiate with intelligence
expert Philip Gregory says Wong's public
defection now places his life and that
of his family back in mainland China in
grave danger I really feel for the
incredible torment that he's now facing
and he clearly has an incredible respect
for for his family there's no question
about that but he sees this what he's
doing has been even more important
because it's got something that affects
future generations condemned to a life
under threat Wang says he hopes his
revelations will inspire those fighting
for freedom of speech and democracy in
the face of oppression from Beijing
he also wants Australia his potential
new home
to understand the Chinese Communist
Party doesn't respect our sovereignty as
it tries to grow its power a worried you
could be got hurt here in Australia oh
yeah she's I am very worried about my
safety in Australia more importantly my
family my wife and child
they knew nothing about this now they
know they are extremely frightened if I
am got had my families will be destroyed
I don't know what future my child would
have
hello I'm Liz Hayes thanks for watching
to keep up with the latest from 60
minutes Australia make sure you
subscribe to our channel you can also
download the 9 now app for full episodes
and other exclusives 60 minutes content